---
publishDate: 2014-11-14T16:26:00
author: Jack Young
title: 'Unit 1 (P3): Barriers to Written Communication'
excerpt: 'Discuss potential barriers to effective communication.'
image: https://media.licdn.com/dms/image/D5612AQHBVL5Vu4gCKg/article-cover_image-shrink_720_1280/0/1715710125132?e=2147483647&v=beta&t=Q4VPanZnr2vQp3mVX_LYa3w9csOxe6YoCQ19ZULLenI
category: Education
tags:
  - Communication
  - Written
---

# Written Communication

Writing skills are an important part of communication.

It is separated in four main topics:

- Structure
- Style
- Content
- Method

Good writing skills allow you to communicate your message with clarity and ease. Correct grammar, punctuation and spelling are key in written communications.

## Barriers

> Discuss potential barriers to effective communication (P3)

### Grammar

You need to make sure that you use the correct grammar. Spelling and punctuation are the main problems. One way to over come this predicament is to read the text out loud so you can hear it and see if it makes sense, then make appropriate changes accordingly.

### Language

Over 7000 different languages are spoken worldwide, so not everyone can understand everything that is said. It is a good idea to learn at least one other language as this will benefit you in the long run.

### Inappropriate Structure

Short paragraphs and sentences can make the work look bad and there are people will not want to read long paragraphs. You need to balance these out depending on the structure. Not having headings to stand out which includes the title of your work.

### Relevance

Identifying relevance can be used in a presentation or a document such as a report or letter. If you have hidden relevant information which is with a lot of other details then you may miss the important facts. Relevant information can be identified in a number of ways which include a change in font size or highlighting text in a different colour.
