---
publishDate: 2014-11-14T19:13:00
author: Jack Young
title: 'Unit 8 (P4): Legislation in E-Commerce'
excerpt: 'Review the regulations governing e-commerce.'
image: https://f.hubspotusercontent10.net/hubfs/2456764/Main_Images_2020/compliance-legislation-1200-627.jpg
category: Education
tags:
  - E-Commerce
  - Data Protection Act
  - Computer Misuse Act
  - Consumer Credit Act
  - Trading Standards
  - Freedom of Information Act
  - Copyright
---

# Legislation

> Review the regulations governing e-commerce (P4)

## Data Protection Act 1998

The Data Protection Act (DPA) is a law designed to protect personal data stored on computers or in an organised paper filing system.

## Computer Misuse Act 1990

The Computer Misuse Act of 1990 is a law in the United Kingdom that makes certain activities illegal, such as hacking into other people’s systems, misusing software, or helping a person to gain access to protected files of someone else's computer.

## Consumer Credit Act 1974

The Consumer Credit Act 1974 requires most businesses that lend money to consumers or offer goods or services on credit or engage in certain ancillary credit activities to be licensed by the OFT. Trading without a licence in such cases is a criminal offence and can result in a fine and/or imprisonment.

## Trading Standards

Trading Standards is responsible for ensuring businesses and consumers understand their legal rights and responsibilities in relation to legislation that falls within its remit. Trading Standards operate under policies and procedures that outline how we work.

## Freedom of Information Act 2000

The freedom of Information Act gives individuals and organisations the right to request official information held by over 100,000 public bodies.

## Copyright

Copyright is the set of exclusive rights granted to the author/creator of an original intellectual property, such as musical work, artistic work and films. These rights are in consonance with copyright laws in India. Once this is done, the rights can be licensed, transferred or assigned. However, the copyright is granted for certain period of time. The copyright issues in India are addressed by the Copyright Act, 1957.
